Charles Babbage

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Babbage

Charles Babbage (26 December 1791 – 18 October 1871) was an English polymath. A mathematician, philosopher,
inventor and mechanical engineer, Babbage originated the concept of a digital programmable computer.

Considered by some to be a "father of the computer", Babbage is credited with inventing the first mechanical computer
that eventually led to more complex electronic designs, though all the essential ideas of modern computers are
to be found in Babbage's analytical engine. His varied work in other fields has led him to be described as "pre-eminent"
among the many polymaths of his century.

Early Life

Babbage's birthplace is disputed, but according to the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography he was most likely
born at 44 Crosby Row, Walworth Road, London, England. A blue plaque on the junction of Larcom Street and Walworth
Road commemorates the event.

His date of birth was given in his obituary in The Times as 26 December 1792; but then a nephew wrote to say that
Babbage was born one year earlier, in 1791. The parish register of St. Mary's Newington, London, shows that Babbage
was baptised on 6 January 1792, supporting a birth year of 1791.

Babbage was one of four children of Benjamin Babbage and Betsy Plumleigh Teape. His father was a banking partner
of William Praed in founding Praed's &amp; Co. of Fleet Street, London, in 1801. In 1808, the Babbage family
moved into the old Rowdens house in East Teignmouth. Around the age of eight, Babbage was sent to a country school
in Alphington near Exeter to recover from a life-threatening fever. For a short time he attended King Edward
VI Grammar School in Totnes, South Devon, but his health forced him back to private tutors for a time.

Babbage then joined the 30-student Holmwood academy, in Baker Street, Enfield, Middlesex, under the Reverend Stephen
Freeman. The academy had a library that prompted Babbage's love of mathematics. He studied with two more private
tutors after leaving the academy. The first was a clergyman near Cambridge; through him Babbage encountered Charles
Simeon and his evangelical followers, but the tuition was not what he needed. He was brought home, to study at
the Totnes school: this was at age 16 or 17. The second was an Oxford tutor, under whom Babbage reached a level
in Classics sufficient to be accepted by Cambridge.

Computing pioneer

Background on mathematical tables

In Babbage's time, printed mathematical tables were calculated by human computers; in other words, by hand. They
were central to navigation, science and engineering, as well as mathematics. Mistakes were known to occur in
transcription as well as calculation.

At Cambridge, Babbage saw the fallibility of this process, and the opportunity of adding mechanisation into its management.
His own account of his path towards mechanical computation references a particular occasion:

In 1812 he was sitting in his rooms in the Analytical Society looking at a table of logarithms, which he knew to
be full of mistakes, when the idea occurred to him of computing all tabular functions by machinery. The French
government had produced several tables by a new method. Three or four of their mathematicians decided how to
compute the tables, half a dozen more broke down the operations into simple stages, and the work itself, which
was restricted to addition and subtraction, was done by eighty computers who knew only these two arithmetical
processes. Here, for the first time, mass production was applied to arithmetic, and Babbage was seized by the
idea that the labours of the unskilled computers could be taken over completely by machinery which would be quicker
and more reliable.

Difference engine

Babbage began in 1822 with what he called the difference engine, made to compute values of polynomial functions.
It was created to calculate a series of values automatically. By using the method of finite differences, it was
possible to avoid the need for multiplication and division.

For a prototype difference engine, Babbage brought in Joseph Clement to implement the design, in 1823. Clement worked
to high standards, but his machine tools were particularly elaborate. Under the standard terms of business of
the time, he could charge for their construction, and would also own them. He and Babbage fell out over costs
around 1831.

Some parts of the prototype survive in the Museum of the History of Science, Oxford. This prototype evolved into
the "first difference engine." It remained unfinished and the finished portion is located at the Science Museum
in London. This first difference engine would have been composed of around 25,000 parts, weigh fifteen tons (13,600
kg), and would have been 8 ft (2.4 m) tall. Although Babbage received ample funding for the project, it was never
completed. He later (1847–1849) produced detailed drawings for an improved version,"Difference Engine No. 2",
but did not receive funding from the British government. His design was finally constructed in 1989–1991, using
his plans and 19th century manufacturing tolerances. It performed its first calculation at the Science Museum,
London, returning results to 31 digits.

Nine years later, in 2000, the Science Museum completed the printer Babbage had designed for the difference engine.
